15 
# Writing Tests in Cairo 1.0 
## Cairo Test Functions
Cairo natively have the ability of running tests to verify that your code (none-test) code is functioning as expected through Cairo functions referred to as `Tests`. The `Test functions` typically:
1. Assert that the results of your code is as expected, 
2. Is able to set up any needed state or data for your test
3. And finally, able to run the code you want to test. 

`Test Functions` in Cairo uses Cairo specific features including the `test` attribute, `should_panice` attribute and the `assert` function. Cairo tests are run with the `cairo-test`command.

### Anatomy of a Test Function
A `test function` in cairo at its simplest should be annotated with the `test` attribute. Attributes are basically metadata about pieces of Cairo code and are presented as `#[**]` with the name of the attribute between the square brackets. Therefore, our  `test` attribute would be presented as `#[test]`. As you have seen by now, an attribute is placed above function declaration `fn`. 

** Let's code test**
First, let us create a new project and we call it `addition` which will add two numbers. We use Scarb for projects therefore, we create the new project as `scarb new addition`. You should have the following files
```
addition
├── cairo_project.toml
├── Scarb.toml
└── src
    └── lib.cairo
```
`cairo_project.toml` file is important in running cairo tests. This is the configuration file for Cairo projects which is required to run `cairo-test .` comand in order to run the code of the crate. This file is not currently implemented by Scarb and therefore might not be present in your code. 

***In the event that you do not see `cairo_project.toml` kindly create a file and name it as such and input the following:***
```
[crate_roots]
addition = "src"

```
In `lib.cairo` file put the following code: 

```
#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    #[test]
    fn it_works() {
        let result = 2 + 2;
        assert(result == 4, 'result is not 4');
    }
}
```
Note the `#[test]` annotation attribute  indicates that this is a test function therefore the test runner would treat this function as a test. It is important to use the attribute on `#[test]` on test functions as it is possible to have non-test functions in the tests module in order to set up specific scenarios that we would want to test. 

In the example above, the test function uses the `assert` function which asserts that the results of adding two numbers 2 and 2 is 4. 

We then run `cairo-test .` command to run all tests with an output like this:
```
$ cairo-test .
running 1 tests
test addition::lib::tests::it_works ... ok
test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 filtered out;
```
`cairo-test` compiled and run the test. The overall summary `test result: ok.` means that all the tests passed, and the portion that reads `1 passed; 0 failed` totals the number of tests that passed or failed.

Let us consider making a test that fails. We can add another test in our test function and name it `another`, therefore, our `lib.cairo` file looks like 
```
#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    #[test]
    fn it_works() {
        let result = 2 + 2;
        assert(result == 4, 'result is not 4');
    }
    #[test]
    fn another() {
        let result = 2 + 2;
        assert(result == 6, 'Make this test fail');
    }
}

```
Note that the second test, `another` has the attribute `#[test]` above it.

When we run the test with `caro-test .` we get the following results. 

```
$ cairo-test .
running 2 tests
test addition::lib::tests::it_works ... ok
test addition::lib::tests::another ... fail
failures:
    addition::lib::tests::another - panicked with [1725643816656041371866211894343434536761780588 ('Make this test fail'), ].
Error: test result: FAILED. 1 passed; 1 failed; 0 ignored

```
Instead of ok, the line `addition::lib::tests::another` shows fail. A new section appears between the individual results and the summary. It displays the detailed reason for each test failure. In this case, we get the details that another failed because it panicked with `[1725643816656041371866211894343434536761780588 ('Make this test fail'), ]` in the src/lib.cairo file

### The Power of assert function

The `assert` function in Cairo uses boolean operations and evaluates a test to either `true` or `false`. The `assert` function evaluates to `true` when our code functions as expected, and therefore, nothing happens and our test passes. However, if the test fails, it evaluates to a `false` and the assert function calls `panic ()` to cause the test to fail with a message we define in our test argument. In our case, we defined `Make this test fail` in the another test case. As such, we can conclude that checking tests with `assert` is useful when evaluating return values. 
