# Setting up a development Environment for Cairo 1.0

Having done a brief introduction to Cairo and Starknet, we are going to be moving unto getting familiar with Cairo 1.0. But before we delve into writing Cairo, we'll need to set up a development Environment for writing, compiling and deploying our Starknet contracts!

## What is a Development Environment?
A development environment is a workspace with a set of processes and programming tools to help developers efficiently build, test, and debug an application or program.

Similar to how we have a plethora of options for developing on Ethereum with Solidity (Truffle, Foundry, Hardhat, etc), we also have a good amount of options for Cairo development on StarkNet. Amongst them are Protostar/Scarb (developed by the Software Mansion Team), Cairo-lang (official development framework), Nile (from the OpenZeppelin Team), and Hardhat (which is a plugin developed by ShardLabs).

At the time of this writing, Scarb and Cairo-lang are the most efficient frameworks for Cairo 1.0 development, so we are going to use the Cairo-lang framework for the purpose of this guide.

## Prerequisites
In order to install and use the Cairo-lang framework effectively, you'd need to have Rust and Python3.9.0 installed. You could check out the installation guides below:

1. [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install)
2. [Python 3.9.0](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-390/)

Having installed these, we'll move forward to setting up a virtual python environment.

## Setting up a virtual environment
Python's virtual environment enables you install libraries and scripts, that are isolated from those installed in other virtual environments and on your system environment. We recommend working inside a virtual environment whilst working with Cairo-lang.

To create and enter a virtual environment, use the command below:

```
    python3.9 -m venv ~/cairo_venv
    source ~/cairo_venv/bin/activate
```

Alternatively you could use [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv).

## Installations
Having setup our virtual environment, we are going to install a few packages before finally installing `Cairo-lang`:

For Ubuntu users:
```
    sudo apt install -y libgmp3-dev
    pip install ecdsa fastecdsa sympy
```

For Mac users:
```
    brew install gmp
    pip install ecdsa fastecdsa sympy
```

Then we can now finally install `Cairo-lang` using pip:
```
    pip install cairo-lang
```

**PS:** If you had a previous version of `Cairo-lang` installed, ensure to uninstall it before running the installation command. To uninstall, simply run:
```
    pip uninstall cairo-lang
```

To confirm installation run the command below:
```
    starknet --version
```

If installation was successful, you should see the `Cairo-lang` version displayed.

## Compiler Setup
To complete our environment setup, we'd need some certain executables like `cairo-compile`, `starknet-compile` etc. To get this we'd do a little engineering:

Firstly change directory to Home, and clone the main cairo repository:
```
    cd ~/
    git clone https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/ .cairo
```

Then checkout to the working branch and generate the release binaries:
```
    cd .cairo/
    git checkout tags/v1.0.0-alpha.6
    cargo build --all --release
```

Finally, we are going to add this generated binaries as executables to our path (.bashrc or .zshrc):

```
    export PATH="$HOME/.cairo/target/release:$PATH"
```

To confirm if this process was successful, open a new terminal and run the command below:

```
    cairo-compile --version
```

You should have your compiler version outputted on the terminal if everything works as expected!

Having setup our development environment, we can now delve into Cairo!