# Data Types: Arrays, Structs, Constants, Tuples, and Mappings

In this section, we would be going through available data types in Cairo and how they are defined.

## Arrays

An Array is a data structure that stores a collection of a single data type.

In Cairo 1.0, they are defined as follows:

```cairo
use array::ArrayTrait;
fn main() {
    let mut feltArray = ArrayTrait::new();

    feltArray.append(1);
    feltArray.append(2);

    let mut u32Array = ArrayTrait::<u32>::new();

    u32Array.append(1_u32);
    u32Array.append(2_u32);
}
```

- First of all, we import `ArrayTrait` using `use array::ArrayTrait`. `ArrayTrait` is a `trait`(you will be learning more about this in chapter 11 of this guide) that makes the creation and use of arrays possible in Cairo 1.0.
- Then, `let mut feltArray = ArrayTrait::new();` allows us to create the array using the `new()` method inside of the `ArrayTrait`. Also, note that the `mut` makes it mutable. Without the `mut` keyword, we won't be able to append values to the array.
- We also created another array `u32Array` to store `u32` values because an array can only take one data types. Here, the data type to be stored in the array is inferred using the first value appended to the array.
- Apart from `new()` and `append()`, there are other methods available for use in the [ArrayTrait](https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/blob/main/corelib/src/array.cairo#L22).

## Structs

A Struct is a data structure that serves as a blueprint for the creation of a custom group of related values.

In Cairo 1.0, they are defined as follows:

```cairo
// Definition
struct Person {
    name: felt252,
    age: u32,
}

//Usage
let person1 = Person{ name: 'Godspower', age: 21 };

//Accessing the values
person1.name;
person1.age;
```

- Just like in Rust, structs could also contain logics but we won't treat that now.

## Constants

Constants are constants..👀. Just like they're names, these values are constant and immutable values. Here are a few rules about how they are defined in Cairo 1.0.

- Constants should be `defined and assigned` in the global scope. That is, they shouldn't be created inside of functions.
- Types are not inferred for constants. That is, you must set the type as at the time of creation.
- Constants can't be changed so using the `mut` keyword is not allowed when creating a constant.
- Its advisable to use Capital letters for Constant names.

This is how a constants are created:

```cairo
const NAME: felt252 = 'Godspower Eze';
```

## Tuples

Tuples are similar to arrays but they can store different data types.

They are defined as follows:

```cairo
#[derive(Drop)]
struct Person {
    name: felt252,
    age: u32
}

let person1 = Person{name: 'Godspower Eze', age: 21_u32};

// Creation
let testTuple = (2_u32, 45, person1);

// Unpacking
let (first, second, third) = testTuple;

```

- don't worry about what `#[derive(Drop)]` does for now, we'd need it for our code to compile, but we'd treat this macro in details in chapter 9.

## Mappings

 Mappings is a key-value data structure; assigning a `value` to a `key` in persistent storage. They are used in Starknet contracts.

 They are defined as follows:

```cairo
#[storage]
struct Storage{
    balances: LegacyMap::<ContractAddress, u32>,
}
```

- Mappings are created using the `LegacyMap` keyword.
- As previously mentioned, the `Storage` struct in a Starknet contract houses all storage values.
- Here, we have a mapping called `balances`. It maps a contract address(`key`) to a balance(`value`).
- We can update the mapping using `self.balances.write(caller, value)`.
