# Events

In Cairo contracts, an `event` is a mechanism for notifying the outside world about a specific occurrence within the contract. Events provide a way for a contract to emit information about its internal state changes, which can be used by external applications outside of Starknet.

## Defining Events

To define an event in Cairo, we use the Attribute `#[event]` followed by `#[derive(starknet::Event)]` attribute. All the different contract events (ie events we want to emit) are defined under the `Event enum`, which implements the `starknet::Event trait`

Here's an example of how we can define an event in Cairo using `ProgressContract`:

```cairo
mod ProgressContract {
    use starknet::ContractAddress;

    #[storage]
   struct Storage {
      stage: u128,
   }

#[event]
   #[derive(Drop, starknet::Event)]
    enum Event {
        IncreasedProgress: IncreasedProgress,
        DecreasedProgress: DecreasedProgress
    }

    #[derive(Drop, starknet::Event)]
    struct IncreasedProgress {
        progress: u128 // single varible ie 128 bit integer
    }

    #[derive(Drop, starknet::Event)]
    struct DecreasedProgress {
        progress: u128
    }


    fn increase_progress(ref self: ContractState, progress: u128) {
         let current = self.stage.read();
         self.stage.write(current + progress);
         self.emit(Event::IncreasedProgress(IncreasedProgress { progress }));
      }

}
```

From the contract above, we can see `enum Event`. The variants `IncreasedProgress and DecreasedProgress` which are of types `IncreasedProgress and DecreasedProgress` respectively, becomes the events we want our contract to emit, value(s) emitted (`progress`) is a variable of type u128 defined within the `IncreasedProgress and DecreasedProgress` structs . Name of the variants acts as the key of the emitted events which gets indexed.

## Emitting Events

After defining events, we'll need to emit them in the desired function.
Emitting events in Cairo 1.0 is a bit different from how it's done in Cairo 0.x:

```cairo
    fn increase_progress(ref self: ContractState, progress: u128) {
         let current = self.stage.read();
         self.stage.write(current + progress);
         self.emit(Event::IncreasedProgress(IncreasedProgress { progress }));
      }
```

from the `Increase_progress` function above, the `ContractState` type is generated by the compiler, and gives access to the storage variables defined by the Storage struct.
`ContractState` which is a representation of the contract’s state gives us the ability to emit events.

In our instance, `self.emit(Event::IncreasedProgress(IncreasedProgress { progress:4 }))` will emit an event with one key, and one data element, 4, based on the generated implementation of the Event trait for the `IncreasedProgress` type.

Things to keep in mind while using Events:

=> The Event type must be an enum

=> Each variant type has to be a struct, and of the same name as the variant
